Renata Diaz: Hi there, my name is Renata Diaz and I'm going to be talking about shifting energetic compensation over time in a desert rodent community,
Renata Diaz: So first some ideas to get us oriented, I'll be talking a lot about total energy use or total energy flux, which is a way of looking at how much resource use,
Renata Diaz: an assemblage or a community is able to uptake and then turn into the activities of processes of life and potentially pass on to higher trophic levels,
Renata Diaz: We measure total energy use by taking the metabolic rates of all the individuals in a community, all the individual organisms, taken together, to measurehow much energy that assemblage is using per unit time or how much energy it takes to power that assemblage
Renata Diaz: for a unit of time,
Renata Diaz: When we're talking about total energy use, one thing that we're interested in is a phenomenon called energetic compensation, which occurs when
Renata Diaz: declines in one species or one group of species are offset by gains made from other species, such that, the fluctuations of the different subsets of the community cancel each other out
Renata Diaz: and render the total energy use of the community more resilient than the species level fluctuations, such that we have relatively stable total energy use, even if different species are fading in and out,
Renata Diaz: For energetic compensation to occur there has to be at least some degree of sort of functional overlap between the species that are present in the assemblage,
Renata Diaz: Such that if one species declines there's another species that is able to use those resources that are now left available,
Renata Diaz: and might make up for the declines in the original species, But, if the species are too distinct in the sets of resources that they're able to use
Renata Diaz: such that there's not there's potential for substitutions between the different species
Renata Diaz: Compensation isn't going to be possible, and might have to wait until somebody shows up in the system who is able to serve that function, or something changes about the way resources are available in that system,
Renata Diaz: And so
Renata Diaz: When we're talking about this kind of species overlap mediated energetic compensation,
Renata Diaz: Something to take into account is that species that are within a single community often differ and how they respond to shifting environmental conditions over time,
Renata Diaz: This means that this kind of differential response to changes in the system can mean that species that overlap or are able to use the same resources under one set of environmental conditions,
Renata Diaz: may not be sort of functionally substitutable,
Renata Diaz: as things change over time, This could be that some species disappear, because they're no longer able to persist in the system and fade out - but they're able to persist in the system
Renata Diaz: under other conditions - or it could be that the distribution of resources under some conditions is different,
Renata Diaz: than others, such that maybe sometimes the resources are available in a way that makes them available to everyone, and maybe under other conditions of resources are available in more differentiated ways,
Renata Diaz: And that when shifting conditions are modulating the degree of overlap or substitutability between different species, the compensation that we observed may be temporary and contingent on the shifting conditions - and not a fixed attribute of a community where
Renata Diaz: over time, it will always maintain this response,
Renata Diaz: One of the most compelling examples experimentally of energetic compensation comes from the desert rodent community out near Portal, Arizona, This is where I do my fieldwork, The site has been running for over 40 years and we're focused on the,
Renata Diaz: rodent community, which is dominated by kangaroo rats, Kangaroo rats are behaviourally dominant and they account for most of the energy use [in the system],
Renata Diaz: Beginning in 1977 there's been a system of experimental exclosures that selectively remove kangaroo rats from a subset of these experimental plots and in the absence of kangaroo rats these other smaller granivores,
Renata Diaz: let us see what that subset of the community is able to do in terms of compensating for kangaroo rats because we've removed kangaroo rats from those plots,
Renata Diaz: And what we've found is that the smaller granivores are able to compensate for kangaroo rats but to varying degrees, Particularly from the beginning of the study until 1996
Renata Diaz: The group of small granivores that was present in the system at that time was able to achieve some degree
Renata Diaz: Of energetic compensation for kangaroo rats but there was still a huge discrepancy in total energy use on exclosure plots relative to control plots,
Renata Diaz: But this changed after around 1996 when a specific species of small granivore, this pocket mouse called Bailey's pocket mouse,
Renata Diaz: established at the site, Bailey's pocket mouse basically increased the total energy use of the small granivores and the compensatory response enormously,
Renata Diaz: Such that we got almost 60 to 80% compensation for kangaroo rats and that the shortfall in energy use that we got from removing kangaroo rats from exclosure plots has been shrunk considerably in the presence of Bailey's pocket mouse,
Renata Diaz: However since 1977 and even since 2010, conditions at the site have shifted, We've seen a transition from a grassland to a shrubland
Renata Diaz: coinciding with a decrease in kangaroo rat relative abundance, These smaller granivores have started to use a larger proportion of the energy across the whole site,
Renata Diaz: And this may be, because scrubland is better habitat for smaller granivores because they tend to forage
Renata Diaz: in sheltered areas whereas kangaroo rats are
Renata Diaz: using different anti predator strategies and are more able to access resources even out in a grassland without shelter,
Renata Diaz: And, following a drought in 2010 we've seen a sharp decline in Bailey's pocket mouse abundance across the site and especially in control plots,
Renata Diaz: Which prompts us to ask, how is this compensatory response that was driven by Bailey's pocket mouse changed? And how has it changed under the conditions of the site now?
Renata Diaz: Do we have just a return to how things were before 1996? Or have some of these other shifts that we've seen in the environmental conditions and in the rodent community
Renata Diaz: Driven a shift in what we see in a compensatory response? We could see that there's been an increase in the,
Renata Diaz: potential overlap between small granivores and kangaroo rats, meaning the smaller ones are now more able to compensate than they were before, Or that there's been an increase in differentiation and the small granivores are doing less than they were before,
Renata Diaz: What we find is that the since 2010, as Bailey's pocket mouse has
Renata Diaz: faded out of the system, that the compensatory response, so the amount of kangaroo rat energy use that the small granivores are
Renata Diaz: picking up the slack on now the kangaroo rats are removed from the exclosure plots, has reverted to about the proportion that we were observing before Bailey's
Renata Diaz: pocket mouse entered the system, The smaller granivores are compensating for kangaroo rats about as much as they were able to do before,
Renata Diaz: But the net effect a kangaroo rat removal on these plots has changed, Kangaroo rat removal now results in a smaller net discrepancy
Renata Diaz: in energy use between the controls and exclosure plots, That tension can be explained because small granivores are accounting for more energy use across all types of plots now, Such that
Renata Diaz: kangaroo rat removal
Renata Diaz: even if it's only compensated for about the same amount, is resulting in a smaller net decline,
Renata Diaz: Taking this together, the first thing to see is that Bailey's pocket mouse is no longer able to play the same role that it was able to 10 years ago - as a sort of analog or substitute for kangaroo rats,
Renata Diaz: That something about the environmental conditions at the site potentially have made it less suitable habitat for Bailey's pocket mouse, or maybe something about the
Renata Diaz: mode of resource availability has changed, In any case there's been a shift such that Bailey is still found at the site, but it's no longer able to maintain the kind of populations needed for it to perform energetic compensation,
Renata Diaz: Whereas the smaller granivores have maintained a more consistent presence at the site and have maintained a relatively stable degree of sort of overlap, or achieved compensation, for kangaroo rats over time, despite the shifts in vegetation and habitat the site,
Renata Diaz: So from this, we see that compensation can be a variable phenomenon that's really contingent on a few specific species that may be relatively
Renata Diaz: ephemeral or transient at the site, And that these dynamics are playing out over decadal timescales, It took 15 years to observe; it lasted about 15 years; and over the past 10 years we've seen another transition at the site,
Renata Diaz: And here's some additional reading about this, I'll be happy to talk more about this in the Q&A session, and thank you so much!